so you are actually primed for
spirituality now because now this is
where blood does so what people think is
that spirituality like you know can be
done at any time and you have all these
like yoga studios where you have people
who are not materialistic and feel like
they devote themselves to spirituality
and forget materialism they're missing
the point they're also deeply unhappy
most of these people the time for
spirituality is when you've won the
material game not because you're losing
the material
so welcome back Ethan how are you doing
man I'm great I'm excited for today I'm
so wound up to follow up actually okay
what would you like to help me
understand what that means well so I'm
sure by the way oh thank you well I
thought this was this is a twitch
Hawaiian shirt it actually let's see if
I can turn the right way here it's
always hard off screen it's like there's
the twitch logo hiding on the back it
was built for some of the twitch folks
went to a conference in Hawaii hmm so
years ago they made Hawaiian shirts and
I got like the last one off the shelf a
few years ago cool it seemed more casual
than the blue button up look from last
week so I went a little more twitch so
you think you might yeah
so you mentioned you're excited about
sort of picking back up so help me
understand what your week has been like
and what you're excited about oh
absolutely
so I reflected a lot on what we talked
about and I also heard a lot of feedback
from people who watched it they got a
lot out of it
but then what I noticed so I'm excited
though to follow up on how to take it
further how did how to take both our
discussion further but also specifically
meditation further because I feel a
little bit like I don't know if this was
subjectively true from your end but I
feel like we talked and had such a great
talk and then you're like oh right we
should meditate boom here do this by
which okay maybe not your intent but I
didn't go that's fun guys what happens
so I kind of before we got back into
sort of excavating my interior I wanted
to learn just a tiny bit more about the
meditation practice you recommended okay
so yeah yeah go for it so my first
question is there's this joke like half
a dozen people have told me which is if
you can't find time if you're too busy
to meditate for 30 minutes you need to
meditate for an hour yep
and so my my week went by with me
meaning like oh I'm gonna get back to
meditating and actually doing almost
nothing and so I wondered this can't be
unusual because you coach bankers
twitchchat he's one of us
ah so I know that you you're you also
work with like Wall Street folks and I'm
sure you must have run in before to
people who nod to you and it like yeah
yeah I'll meditate yeah and then like
don't yeah what's what's what's your
recommended way to break that cycle
besides gut up and do it if there is
anything else yeah so got up and do it I
think is never my answer okay so that's
not like that's not a real answer like
if people could got up and do it they
would be doing it
yep so there are other kinds of things
that are getting in the way okay so we
can talk a little bit about behavioral
change and how behavioral change happens
okay um and we can also talk
specifically about meditation so let's
start there the first thing is I think
the process of learning how to bake
meditation into your day is half of what
you want from meditation to begin with
because that involves you being
reflective about like who you are how
your mind works how your day works and
how all of these things fit together
without you being able to do what you
want to right so that's fantastic and I
think a lot of the progress that I make
with people is in the process of
figuring out why they can't find time to
meditate okay so that in and of itself
tells you like you know what are your
priorities like what do you focus on why
can your mind not let go of something
that you feel is so vital to do
something that is quote-unquote less
vital but more important so even in that
process you're gonna have to detach a
little bit you'll gain a lot of the
benefits of meditation awesome that
makes sense
so we'll talk about that the other
practical thing is that I mean so a lot
of it is just a practical discussion so
sometimes it's just about sort of
eliciting behavioral change and this is
kind of like psychology research or even
like behavioral economics kind of stuff
where it can be like I work with the
different people you know the different
people I work with we try to find like
an easy way to fit it into their day
which is almost like problem-solving so
I'll give you just one example so there
was a physician I was working with and
he was having trouble finding time to
meditate and he actually had an
interesting experience happened where he
was chanting
and he had an infant child like a young
child and the child one day started
laughing at him because he didn't
understand like you know what was
happening like that he was just sitting
there with his eyes closed and making
these funny sounds and the kids started
laughing and triggered actually a lot of
shame for this person sure and so he
found it very difficult to meditate at
home so we sort of figured out okay like
so one thing that I recommend is that
you find something that you're already
doing within your day and you try to
anchor in so you already have a
pre-existing anchor and you just try to
add meditation to it so for this person
they would take a jog every morning that
was a thirty minute jog and halfway
through their jogging route there was a
park bench and so what they decided to
do is they're gonna jog for thirty like
you know they're gonna do their normal
30 minute route they're gonna stop on
the park bench for somewhere between
five and 20 minutes and it started with
five minutes which you can definitely
bake it like you can find in a store
five minutes yeah and it was sort of
that behavioural anchor that they would
sit there every day on the park bench
because they're gonna be there anyway
and and kind of meditate for a few
minutes and then finish their run for
another person it was kind of you know
meditating on the subway and we sort of
taught techniques that they can do like
at their desk so they would feel fine
during the day but when they go into
work they would start to feel really
really anxious because they were
concerned about doing a good job and
living up at into expectations they just
sort of made a kind of a career
transition and it was a really great fit
and they really like liked being there
their bosses really valued them but
there were just a little bit concern
because they had a different background
for most of their co-workers so for them
we actually taught them when they sit
down at their desk there's a silent
meditation practice that they can do
that you know they could do at their
desk for five minutes that kind of like
reset those feelings and then sort of
started the day off right
so my first thought so my first thought
is like there's two things that we can
do one is sort of a behavioral like
problem solving how can we find a time
in your day that you can try and when
you try it you're gonna succeed or
you're gonna fail and either one is fine
you know and as you fail we explore
what's the nature of your failure why do
you fail did you just bite off more than
you can chew or use someone who just
expects more of you than you're capable
of
you know do you just hold yourself to an
unreasonably high standard we dig into
that and then over time people
eventually start meditating and I'm not
quite sure how or why so that's one
thing is we can kind of talk about
behaviorally how to do things ii think
we could talk about is why is it that
you can't find five minutes to meditate
in terms of what is it that's so
pressing and we kind of can get a little
bit about your attachments because your
attachments i suspect to keep you from
meditating yeah I think that might be
more interesting I think so agree so I
can kind of jump to that I did some
reflecting on what you had said and I
realized from our session a week ago
from our discussion a week ago one of my
issues we didn't get into that I think I
feel is driven from some of the
childhood issues we talked about is now
I have the opportunity to do many
pleasurable things right I have friends
I can travel I can play sports all of
which I enjoy but I get into having a
fear of missing out in other words it
would not be it too many negatives it's
very like me to plan a weekend that has
like nine activities in it and I
actually consider it bonus points if I
can construct an activity that does like
three things at once so like I'm gonna
go skiing and I'm gonna meet my friends
skiing and we're gonna talk on the lifts
and eat lunch together and I'm like I'm
gonna manage to pack in hanging out with
friends with physical activity with with
intellectual discussion and for me like
I run a victory lap if I can cram in
three or four value propositions to one
block of time okay and so obviously that
well maybe not obviously but I think
that fear of missing out like oh it's I
will overload my schedule they you
probably know this thing not having
enough empathy for your future self I
create a schedule that's like well I
have three dinner invitations so I'll
drop by the first one for appetizers the
second one for main course and catch the
last people for after-dinner drinks
my mind doesn't see the problem with
that when I'm planning it but then of
course I experienced the problem with
that when I'm trying to excuse myself
from the first dinner to get to the
second dinner to get to the third dinner
okay I may go in a slightly bizarre
direction though for it has a high
chance of just completely missing are
you afraid of death terrified I've been
working on that my whole life well I
talked about that last week that started
yeah yeah I said I'll refresh your
memory really early I said at 5:00 I
asked my father what happens when you
die yeah fear of death I've recently
come closer to being okay with it but
that has been my life long tap root
terror okay so let's just understand do
you ever do you have a sense of why I
asked you're saying that I have FOMO and
then I asked you are you afraid of death
yeah I get it I believe I get it
so explain it to the rest of us um I'm
trying to cram in as much life as
possible and a time as a signal that I'm
alive and the death like if death is
nothingness then if I'm doing seven
things at once I'm very alive well done
beautiful right all right so I I think I
think this comes back to I mean you
could talk about FOMO and you can talk
about all that kind of stuff but that I
think is the essence of it Oh guys that
you feel and I think if you if you want
to stop doing this to yourself so this
comes from what do you think the emotion
is or the feeling is that drives you to
pack your weekends full of just high
value proposition social activities fear
the emotion is is I mean the root
emotion is being afraid of not the root
fear of being afraid of death I said
last week was being afraid of life going
on without me of things happening that I
couldn't see or participate in so I'm
just transporting that to daily life
because if there's a dinner of my
friends and I'm not going to be there I
feel dead to that dinner
right yeah it's not that conscious yeah
but absolutely so so I mean what I'm
detecting from you is desperation sure
right there's like every weekend is
packed with desperation well I'm not
arguing it there but it's sad yeah so I
think it's it's interesting because so
even this is gonna be challenging
because you're so smart that you can do
all this like Freudian kind of stuff in
your head and you're gonna arrive at
conclusions for yourself which are valid
the challenge is that when you do your
analysis you're like missing something
and what I'm missing from you here is
the like the desperation like you are
desperate so the way that you need to
look at yourself is someone who is like
desperate that life is going to end
okay I know and and we so you have kids
are you mind if I ask ya I've tits I
have a blended family 17 16 14 8 ok so
when you're 17 year old was 2 or 3 and
you like dropped them off at daycare or
whatever
do you remember what their reaction was
or like let's say you had to go to work
in the morning they have separate uh
yeah they cry there you go being
intellectual yeah I I caught myself
though right yeah but what what does
that mean like what are they feeling
abandon absolutely right they're
desperate for you they're hungry for you
yeah and and so this thing like it's not
I mean sure it's FOMO
but there's just hunger for you that
there is not enough life to be lived no
and you've got to try to pack in as much
life as you can into every moment which
sounds so positive to fill your life to
the fullest you know and live every
moment as if it was your last
and like that sounds so positive there's
in fact shelves full of advice books
that tell you to do that and that's what
you're doing and that's why you're
torturing yourself okay because you are
listening yummy you're probably one of
these self-help junkies totally and and
so you want to pack life to the fullest
no no man you got to just chill out
right you got to understand that like
there is no way that you were going to
experience
a fraction of what life has to offer
just not going to happen
that's very hard to hear yes it's
logically true but sucks yeah so what's
hard to hear about it let's talk about
that that there's cool stuff in life
whatever we can redefine cool but
there's stuff I won't get to do how does
that make you feel
um sad like yeah yeah okay so we're
gonna so but what emotion are you
missing there you're missing one I think
there's some anger or frustration very
good right so you're so good at
detecting the sadness but you push that
anger away so easily what are you angry
about
I want the world to conform to what I
want I want whatever it's a tantrum I
want what I want
yes beautiful it's a tantrum beautiful
right because here's the thing Ethan
it's unfair
it's unjust isn't it I have trouble you
like the the two-year-old in me feels
that I as an intellectual I have trouble
saying well it's unfair that you can't
do everything that seems like well duh
but yes the two-year-old in me wants to
throw my toys and be like dammit I get
to do everything yes very good
and now we come to another part of your
problem which is the the the adult Ethan
does what to the child Ethan tells him
to suck it up there you go right you
were a big big bully towards yourself
I've never heard it put that way I might
have been called a bully but not towards
myself well I mean if other people are
calling you a bully where do you think
you learned that yeah sure right maybe
from your parents but probably from
yourself and that's just how I mean so
we are making so much progress that I
just have to stop for a second and just
like just sit with this and let me know
like what is what's sticking what's not
sticking well the first thing that super
stuck was just the connection that my
wild desire to do everything is driven
out of the root cause problem of fear of
death so solve the root cause solve the
rest yeah and the second thing was yeah
the the tantrum part like the damn it I
want it might you know and the fact that
I do suppress I have all these
behavioral layers over top of the child
that says you can feel that but you can
never show it because it's not mature
yes and here's the thing who wins at the
end of the day the two-year-old or the
adult always the two-year-old
yes very good right so the two-year-olds
gonna get us do yeah it's a dolphin
it's the elephant and the writer if you
know that yes very good yeah so why
don't you explain that analogy to other
people so the elephant the writer I
learned about in a book called switch by
Chip and Dan Heath but the the idea is
your intellect is like the writer of an
elephant and it can like pull on the
elephant's reins and maybe guide it a
tiny bit for a short time
but your emotions are the elephant in
this case the child is the elephant and
it will wear the rider out and go where
at once so the only way the rider can
really get where it wants to go is to
help the elephant want to go that way
like make it emotionally appealing
because that's where all your energy
source comes from yeah so I would say in
in your case what you've got to do is
align the two-year-old with the adult
right you have to instead of bullying
the two-year-old because then what
happens is that the two-year-old goes
under the surface and then starts to
exert his baleful influence on you and
cloaks it in positivity cloaks
desperation in just pure positivity yeah
who can argue that dinner with your
friends is a bad thing exactly right who
can argue that three or four what you
called social interactions value
propositions I don't think so but I
might have you said you want to get as
many value propositions as you can into
one activity yeah like as many sources
of enjoyment right so so I like to talk
to people I like to I like to do a bunch
of things so I try and add them all into
like one activity yeah and and so I
think you just got to be careful about
that because you know that's just I mean
that you know that that's not gonna work
right and the way to do that is not by
willfully bullying yourself to not do
that so like I think the answer that a
lot of people are looking for is that
you just need to learn how to not do
that right just stop it
just do less just change change your
behavior plan less meditate more but
that that's not gonna work like if you
want to be free of this because be free
of it if you want it to stop of its own
volition that's the goal is not control
not willpower but sublimation okay
remove the root right and that comes to
first of all like you have to let me
just think about how we can do this so
one way to do it is to a conquer your
fear of death which can achieve through
meditation but you know the other thing
is is to think a little bit about like
so usually a fear I mean all human
beings to a certain degree have a
fear of death but in your case I would
guess that the reason you have FOMO is
because you actually missed out so what
did you miss out on yeah so I was
thinking some I was prompted by someone
else to think a little bit about this I
grew up on a farm and my parents were
older I was the last child the youngest
my parents had spent a whole generation
raising kids my brother was 18 years
older than I was and the other kids in
the middle
so by the time they got around to me
they were kind of done with it I was
what we call a bonus baby my mom
famously said I'm what
so between living in a rural area with
no other kids around and my parents kind
of being ready to move on I mostly had
to entertain myself like I read tons of
books and I got into I played a lot of
D&D and I played a lot of video games
but they were all solo activities
because I didn't have siblings near my
age and I didn't really have neighbors
or neighborhood near my age so in
thinking about it what I missed out on
and I also grew up overweight so I
wasn't like a big sporting outdoors
person like I am now so I pretty much
sat at home and read books and I didn't
because you don't know any different I
didn't have a conscious feeling of
missing out but between the social and
the physical isolation I think I
probably did miss out a lot okay so if
you oddly enough so that once again
we're gonna have to try to like how can
I say this we're gonna have to try to
dismantle that because I don't that that
sounds intellectually beautiful like
that sounds like something that we call
like a psychoanalytic formulation right
where you sat down and you've studied
your life and you come up with this
beautiful poetic you know he grew up and
his parents were not ready for another
child and he's spent in a time by
himself that's beautiful and and if this
was therapy I would be elated my sense
is that that has no emotional teeth to
it because it sounds like your actual
experience
this is you isn't it I was lonely my
actual emotional experience is
loneliness is that how you felt yeah
when when I wanted to do things with
friends and that meant convincing my
parents to drive somewhere and they
weren't available or frit you know right
and and how old were you do you remember
a specific instance no I remember like
every Friday night I had a couple of
friends that I would call their houses
like can I come over can you come over
and I can't pointer like a specific
instance but I know that if I got a
bunch of nose I was disappointed like oh
another day alone and again it wasn't
that well formulated but I know that
like whether or not I got a yes and
somebody was coming over was a huge deal
to me was there a day that you stopped
calling uh no I don't think I ever gave
up hmm but there was a limited set of
people I felt close enough to call like
I didn't have a big circle of friends
hmm and and were there situations where
people said yes and then your parents
couldn't like drive you over no because
I would have always checked that first I
see and mmm let me just think for a
second yep stumped him
it's one way of putting it do you feel
when you were thinking about your day
now on the weekends yep here comes i
gave him time to think and he's loaded
up he's get you you think i stopped you
but it's it's actually the exact
opposite yeah I know let's dump me
I see the [ __ ] in the armor and here we
go I got it but it was funnier yeah
absolutely absolutely and it's funnier
now and now you know I'll miss because
that'll do you the best entertainment um
so but here's the thing that I'm trying
to get a sense of when you plan a day on
the weekend yeah and you have that
feeling of missing out no does that feel
like you the feeling that you had when
you were growing up and you reached out
to friends on a Friday night does it
feel the same yeah it feels even worse
now like tell me what it feels like now
you're planning your weekend so like yep
it's Thursday right yeah today it's
Friday yeah so have you already planned
your weekend abnormally no not
completely
okay and that's because of weather
conditions okay so like when did you
start planning your weekend early this
week yeah so get to it huh what you
don't get to it no I love my job but I'm
just a planner um okay
revealing like I say without irony or
any joke that I know what I think I'm
going to be doing I have a google
calendar that shows
what I'll be doing every weekend now
through November okay not in varying
detail but like I keep a rolling plan of
yeah travel and gatherings and and when
you're kind of putting together your
weekend mm-hmm what is it
what what are you feeling excitement
about some of the stuff I'll do but also
like what are the trade offs of stuff I
can't do so I feel disappointment or
stress about things I can't do what do
you mean by stressed what is that what
does that mean
well I could just be super practical I
like to ski and I have two sets of
friends who are going to ski at
different ski resorts this weekend and I
can't be with both sets of friends in
both places and I want to and how does
it make you feel to not be able to be
with them like I'm missing something I'm
doing for a deeper feeling hold on uh I
feel like a failure actually like
somehow I that somehow if I were smarter
or more clever I could have made it all
work
what are you failing at
getting as much as I possibly can
filling the hole like feeling like I
have had it all I've eaten the cake and
I still have the cake and I get to talk
about the cake it's like an avarice for
experience or life yeah right a Hunger
the hunger isn't being met yeah and and
when have you felt that hunger when did
that hunger start within you ah I can't
even remember I don't know I can't put I
can't immediately put it like that
started it's grown on my life because my
ability to do things is grown and so you
get it you have more consciousness of it
I don't know I mean I I point again to
that event I described last week of like
the feeling the black hole and inside
myself as a five-year-old of oh wow when
I die I won't be able to do any of these
things yes my fear of death was about
not being able to do stuff with people
okay it was about not existing
it wasn't about like oh death will be
painful or death is metaphysical it
would be lack of ability to interact so
I want to point something out to you
okay so the first is that despite your
ability to eat more and more and more
what happens to the hunger gets worse so
how does that work
perverse well yeah but what like what
does that mean you adapt to it it in
other words what satisfied before no
longer satisfies you you ratchet up your
desires because you become accustom you
become accustomed to whatever you were
doing okay
so I'll put it a slightly different way
so what happens so it's almost like the
more that you feed the hunger the hunger
is like an organism within your mind
that
now then does what with food
eet's it makes it what happens yeah and
then you shake it out the things that
you feed they grow absolutely right so
like it's strange because you'd think
that if you have a black hole within you
if you have hunger or desperation for
something and you satisfy that desire
that that desire should be satisfied but
what you're actually what you've been
doing your entire life through the
pursuit of positivity and and packing in
value propositions and making every
ounce of life you're squeezing the juice
out of every ounce of life right for
kids successful career lots of friends
packed social calendar more social
events your life is just so full of
everything but not full enough it's
never gonna be full enough okay because
the more you feed it the more it what
gross absolutely
I passed the quiz you passed the quiz
because now we have to try to understand
why you make jokes and what that means
right cuz you weren't making jokes last
week you're making jokes this week okay
so I'm not quite sure what that means
but usually it's a sign of some kind of
defensive nasaw
do I feel defensive no if it's any kind
of defensive 'no sits embarrassment yep
it's embarrassment you know to sit and
say oh yeah poor me I do all these great
things and ice it's not enough and I
have problems with wanting more yeah
well I'm glad you're able to see it yeah
right so what are you doing to yourself
there that's me telling the two-year-old
who feels embarrassed to put up with it
or get over it
right I don't know if it's quite the
two-year-old but I definitely think
there is someone within you who's doing
some bullying okay right so I think
you're bullying multiple children within
yourself Wow by the way my Chad just
totally glommed on to the the bullying
the two-year-old they're like all about
it my channel like newsflash Amazon VP
bully's two-year-old okay footage at 11
but anyways it's okay it's good yeah I
mean I but I think this is what we do to
ourselves so one thing is is do you feel
I see this a lot so do you feel guilty
for having so much and being so
unsatisfied totally yeah
yes I I I feel like I've been incredibly
lucky in my life and so I think a lot
about the I'm a Christian so I think a
lot about the Christian responsibility
of that right the to whom much has been
given from him much will be required so
it's another performance standard to hit
and I certainly think about it
what was the question I asked you you
asked me I don't know you asked me um do
you feel guilty for a lot yeah do I feel
guilty for having a lot so there are a
couple of things that I want to just
point out so the first is that I think a
lot of people in our chat hope to one
day be in your shoes in a lot of
different ways right yeah I think they
hope to be married they hope to be
professionally successful they hope to
have go skiing with friends they hope to
have families they hope to be lose
weight they hope to you know that they
they actually it's bizarre they long for
that part of you that bullies yourself
into success they crave that I feel like
if I could give them one thing that they
could sign up for it's they wish they
could beat the [ __ ] out of themselves to
get themselves out of there their room
and away from the computer and out of
bed they long to be like these people
who are disciplined and who can wake up
every day and work and go to work and
drive themselves they're looking for to
be driven which I certainly am and and
they long for that right so the first
thing that I want everyone to pay
attention to is that this guy he has a
lot of reasons to be happy in life and I
think there are parts of him that are
very happy but also deeply deeply
unsatisfying true right and and so this
goes back to this core idea that would
talked a lot about which is that
satisfaction contentment don't come from
the outside they come from within and
that I know gets put up on calendars and
stuff like that and like everyone's like
oh like peace and contentment come from
within man but like it's not like that
it's like scientific we have a test case
here of a guy who has gotten more and
more and more in life and it's never
enough it's never enough right you can
have two people who want to go skiing
with you there used to be a time where
you would call and no one would say yes
I can hang out with you or I want to
hang out with you and you would think
that that kid would be satisfied if he
could get one person to say yes I want
to hang out with
in 30 or 40 years later your challenge
has become the completely different
thing of what it was when you were a
child you didn't have enough attention
from your parents you didn't have enough
attention from your friends and you were
playing well D&D is a group thing but
you were reading a lot of books and
playing a lot of video games now you
have a family that I presume loves you a
lot
mm-hmm no you were loved you know
suspected you were feared and people
longed for your company and still it
isn't enough Wow harsh but fair right
yeah and and that too I'm just kind of
you know thinking about what you're
saying about the culture of Amazon
you're a great fit for Amazon because
they don't be good and great and
exceptional and an Amazon you're still
not enough yep right when they say high
standards relentlessly so you know and
and so if you hit a home run their next
question is it's there's no victory lap
or maybe there's a victory lap I don't
know I mean I don't know but their next
question is when's the next one hitting
a single good job next time hit a double
hit a double good job
next time hit a triple hit a triple good
job next time it's a home run hit one
home run next time you need another home
run and then it's three home runs in a
row in four home runs in a row and
that's what you do to yourself it's same
thing so I think you're a great fit I
think it's it's good in terms of you
know performance like because you've
succeeded yes
and Amazon clearly has is successful I
think it's you know it's gigantic and
successful so we can't dispute that but
they're suffering with it and in your
case I think you've got to learn so
first thing to understand is that you
can feed the beast as much as you want
to but the more you feed it the more it
grows and the hungrier it gets that's
incredibly valuable right I will
remember that and yeah second thing is
I'm going to share with you sort of a
core like basically the same thing but
in Inwood this sort of metaphysics
there's like earth there's something
like heaven in there's
thing like hell but they have this layer
between earth and hell called the realm
of hungry ghosts I've heard of this I
don't know much about it and it's it's
not quite hell but it's basically a
realm where souls who are hungry go and
though they eat and they eat and they
eat they never feel full and they don't
quite call that hell but it's kind of
like hell ish right it sounds pretty bad
yeah and so it's just a kind of a
never-ending hunger and and that's what
we we see in you so I think that
somewhere in here when it comes to
meditation so now we're going to talk
about meditation so I think you need to
you need to learn to be comfortable with
death okay and the way that you're gonna
learn to be comfortable with death is
there some so I think that's gonna carry
a lot of things right so the first is
that you have the sense that time is
running out and you haven't accomplished
enough you haven't gone see enough times
you haven't done this enough you haven't
done this enough like dude if you do not
get this in order every year that goes
by you were gonna get more and more
desperate and more and more screwed
because this age I see that's toll and
the end of the movie is coming up it's
just gonna get more and more terrifying
so now is your time to do this and now
you're ready so this is the other thing
about wouldthe so you know Buddha
started his spiritual journey out of
desperation as well like I don't know if
you kind of know this but I'll share the
story with you so like you know Buddha
was a prince and he was powerful and he
was respected and he was loved he was
married he had a healthy young son he
had everything in the world and then he
woke up one day and he's like it's not
enough for I want more he and
desperation and that's why he turned to
spirituality so I think this is a subtle
challenge but most of the people who are
watching I don't think are as successful
as you are to be blunt and I'm place no
value judgment on they're also a lot
younger so we were going to be but they
have this idea that if they can have all
of the things that you have they'll one
day be happy the source for their
happiness is because something is
missing in their life and they think
that if I have a job or if I have a
family or if I have this and if I have
money and if I have this and if I have
this then I will be happy right it's
same as when you were a kid and you said
five someone to hang out with on the
weekend I will be happy and I want
everyone to understand this it's not
gonna work like it's just not gonna work
and you guys can see it when you when
you look at Ethan that it's not working
like sure he has all those things I
think you should pursue all those things
I think you should strive to be
successful but it's not gonna make you
happy
so you are actually primed for
spirituality now because now this is
where blood does so what people think is
that spirituality like you know can be
done at any time and you have all these
like yoga studios where you have people
who are not materialistic and feel like
they devote themselves to spirituality
and forget materialism they're missing
the point they're also deeply unhappy
most of these people the time for
spirituality is when you've won the
material game not because you're losing
the material game and because once you
get to the point where you're at you're
actually screwed because other people
can chase after a material goal and they
can believe that that material goal is
can bring them happiness and that is
enough to pull them in the right
direction of growth in your case you've
achieved that and now you've got nothing
left to pull you right and so you're
screwed
and Buddha was screwed too because he
achieved right he had everything and
then he wakes up one day and he's
unhappy and so you don't even have the
illusion of happiness from a material
thing to like Drive you forward and this
is why you need spirituality
spirituality is not born of positivity
it's born of abject desperation and
terror okay so you're ready for it buddy
so now you're ready to meditate because
the only thing that is going to give you
peace the only thing that is going to
satisfy that hunger within you is going
to be meditation and that's hyperbole
there could be other things spirituality
is maybe a better way to put it so you
can find your own path that doesn't have
to be meditation and in your case what I
think you need is shoonya meditations
kurosu shunya is the Sanskrit word for
void it is also the concept of zero okay
so people sort of claim I don't know
what's true or isn't true that the you
know the the concept the numerical
concept of zero was discovered in India
and and that like you know it's my
belief that the people who sort of
discover this mathematical concept
I'm sure when Maeby was discovered
elsewhere that you know the historian
within me wonders about things like that
but basically like this sense of like
nothingness and void in a complete
absence of self and I think for you to
be able to be comfortable with death you
were afraid of nothingness right you
were afraid of this thing that is
incapable of experience because you
believe that experience is what leads to
happiness like doing something out there
is what leads to contentment it's when
you call you pick up the phone and you
call someone to say yes I am coming over
that you feel happy and so you're not
wrong and thinking that that's just the
way that your life has been no so in
your case what we need to do is give you
an experience of death give you an
experience of shoonya and the more that
you can experience that I'm not asking
you to just to be very clear and for
medical legal reason I'm not asking you
to die I'm so clear don't do that I will
assert back I'm clear on that what I
mean is that you need to have an
experience of self that is not even okay
we need to have an experience of like
void and blankness and a lack of
existence of who you are and I believe
you will find that experience to be
incredibly comforting because there is
nothing as comforting as like wrapping
yourself in the void and I'm not asking
people to commit suicide like don't do
that so you don't have to die to
actually have that experience I actually
don't know what happens after death but
what I do know is from a psychological
perspective there is something called
annihilation of the ego which is where
you have an experience of self that is
outside of who you identify as and those
meditation practices are shooting your
meditation and unfortunately there is
going to be a series of things that I
have to teach you before you do showing
your meditation okay so the sooner your
meditation practice that I'm going to
tell you and this by the way so I have
to do a couple of medical legal things
here too so there are cases of
meditation induced psychosis so
meditation is not a practice that is
not without risks and the especially
shoonya meditation practices are
different so there is an issue in your
meditation practice that I'm willing to
teach you but I'm not gonna teach you on
stream because I don't want people at
home to do okay it could be dangerous it
needs to be done under the guidance of
someone who knows what it what it is and
it could be kind of it's funny someone
asked at the beginning of the stream I
just saw a question in chat about like
sometimes when I feel when I start to
meditate
I feel like this vast emptiness and it
terrifies me and then like I get scared
and I stop meditating absolutely this
person is doing it right it just needs
to be done with guidance
so the first a part of meditation that
I'm gonna teach you is through cuca or
fixed-point gazing and this you can do
at home okay we'll kind of get to the
you know once you learn how to do this
so fixed-point gazing is simply that
that you gaze at a particular thing
without blinking for an extended period
of time and I think a good thing to
start with as a candle so gleich candle
gazing is a good practice I've just not
figured out how to
how to teach this over the internet
because oftentimes it requires a candle
I think looking at a real candle works
so instead what we're gonna try to do is
just we're just gonna try to do the
fixed-point gazing part I'll explain
what you guys should do at home with a
candle but the idea is to just gaze at a
candle flame for an extended period of
time without blinking but I guess what
we can try is to soulfully gaze into
each other's eyes without blinking
alright so so I'm gonna just kind of
we're gonna close your eyes for a second
Ethan okay and do you have actually do
you have a source of soft light anywhere
around you uh sure I mean I have I have
my streaming light up here that's gonna
be too bright too bright then no okay so
we're you just gonna try this I I don't
know how this is gonna work but we'll
join so what are we can just look at I
want you to look at this point on my
face okay and I'm gonna look at that
point on your face so that was your eyes
okay and I want you to just first feel
what your eyes feel like sort of feel
the wetness feel the comfort of having
your eyes closed and now what I want you
to do is slowly open your eyes to kind
of like half lit at gaze and what I'm
gonna do is turn off your streaming
light actually is it gonna be completely
dark in there without your streaming
light completely dark okay good this is
better okay so now what I want you to do
is to look so so close your eyes and
then slowly open them and go to half
lidded gaze and stare at this point and
what we're gonna do you can open a
little bit more so what we're gonna do
oh discord here we go chat something
just did we
okay your internet connection is
unstable are we still alive broke the
internet internet doesn't want us to do
it that's alright it came back okay so
just gaze over here mm-hmm and then just
try not to blink so the first thing that
you're gonna feel I'm gonna walk you
through some sensations okay the first
thing that you're gonna feel is some
degree of itching or burning mm-hmm and
it can help to squint a little bit if
you need to and then try to relax after
the squint so go into a squint and out
of a squint okay and then you're gonna
feel the tears start to come so let the
tears come it's a sense of lack of
lubrication in your eyes so the tears
are gonna want to come and lubricate
okay and what we're gonna do is try to
hold this for between 30 and 60 seconds
without blinking
and now close your eyes so feel the
relief feel the slight burning and now I
want you to look at the screen of your
mind so you're gonna see almost like
that your visual receptors are still
active and do you see something within
the blackness of your mind yeah you okay
so I want you so there should be
something central that you see does that
make sense
mm-hmm so focus on the central thing
tell me what you see
it's it's the after image of your face
mostly like the lower half of your face
okay so what does it look like to you
describe what you see not not what it is
looks like two points in the middle of a
black outline beautiful so I want you to
concentrate on those two points in the
black outline and try to keep them as
central as you can in your in the screen
of your mind or your Chi Akash just what
it's called and let me know if you lose
it time is it trying to move no but it's
it's blurring out over time focus on it
concentrate look closer
okay yeah it's coming back some good
still have it mmm not really it's okay
so let's just faded away so open your
eyes good so that's what you need to
practice so take a candle okay
so tell me how do you feel right now
tired like a little wrung out good I
mean was that you didn't feel that way
before the practice right no no yeah
so this so this is what I mean so this
practice is like intensive meditation
right so there are a lot of times when
people do like when we do breath
oriented techniques those are
invigorating energizing they increase
your prana or your Chi this practice is
going to take it out of you it requires
a lot of effort and it's like not a
common experience of meditation most
people feel energized when we do
meditation this practice is gonna drain
you which is what we want okay
in your case okay okay so this practice
is also called the rocker or fixed-point
gazing tra ta ka I can send you some
information about it yeah I'm interested
and what I want you to do is do it with
especially a long stomach candle if you
can't not like a long long stem yeah I
want to see the stem of a candle right
and what you want to do is over the
course of 30 seconds start at the base
of the candle and move your way up to
the the flame and then stare at the
flame for maybe another 30 to 60 seconds
without blinking and then close your
eyes and then hang on to the after image
and put your concentration on the after
image that's phase one kind of guys do
did people at home do the practice do
you guys want to try it again okay
so thoughts questions uh well of course
right like you've promised secret
knowledge that that has to be you know
given offline like of course I'm
immensely curious right like yes sorry I
didn't mean to do no no I I get was an
audit I I didn't I didn't mean to try to
create a call to their no no it's just
I'm serious so like some of the stuff
that you do in meditation like literally
there are case reports of meditation and
do psychosis and one of the biggest
things that I've learned being both a
medical doctor and someone who's been
teaching meditation for 15 years is some
of this stuff it's not just a it's not
mindfulness we're not doing mindfulness
right right I'm sure you've done
mindfulness I have this does not feel
quite like that this is something
different this is taking something out
of you and if you give it too much
you're gonna go nuts Wow all right right
and you you know what I mean like when
you do mindfulness like how do you feel
at the end of mindfulness rested and
focused centered yeah you feel how do
you feel at the end of this I said I
felt wrung out yeah right so this is
different like this is this is like
spiritual growth level stuff that we
don't talk about anymore like somewhere
along the way when mindfulness crossed
the pond like we left a bunch of stuff
in it like India and we brought the
McDonald's version that's absolutely
okay so this isn't Mickey D's the Happy
Meal yeah but do you other thoughts or
questions no not I don't know it I feel
like where I was at the end of last week
where now you've taken me in a direction
where I'm like I don't know I need time
to absorb that to figure out what
questions I would have good that's our
goal
right what yeah I guess yeah well I yeah
it's definitely the goal in terms of
progress because you definitely left me
with two or three things that I'm like
oh [ __ ] he's completely right and why
haven't I seen that and oh my god that's
like a you know that
the I'm feeding the hungry beast and
that makes it bigger
I've always known and agree with
intellectually the the way to have
enough is to want less not to get more
but then you've pointed out where I'm
completely not living that and I'm like
oh [ __ ]
and then how do i unwind that because in
my case I've like I've built not only
muscles at doing it but like pride in
the sense of I'm capable of scheduling
anything I can make I could actually ski
in two places at once I just need a
helicopter like that's how my mind works
and yeah you're telling me like you've
spent 20 or 30 years honing an ability
that's actually bad not not that it
doesn't have uses but that in his aspect
is is maladaptive maladaptive that's the
word yeah so that's okay so you don't
have to unravel it what we're gonna do
is just unplug it okay okay and even
better that yeah so so let me ask you
this so you it may be hard to recall but
like what were you trying to optimize or
get out of the practice that we were
doing while you were doing it when
you're trying to hold on to the
afterimage what are you trying to feed
the only thing I was trying to feed was
being able to do it like success focus
so you're gonna ask you in a different
way yeah are you actually trying to feed
something no right so you're wondering
how do I stop feeding this thing well
you just practice not feeding things and
you just did it you just took the first
step okay that's for a moment your mind
is not trying to feed anything
there's no FOMO there's no feeding
there's no hunger there's just you and
what are you in that moment
you're not anything there we go that is
shoonya that is jr. you are not anything
and the more that you become comfortable
with that person there's no need for
FOMO
FOMO will go away on its own you don't
have to conquer it you don't have to do
anything it's just gonna go away be gone
they'll wake up one day done
that'll be awesome so the only other
place I get close to this is really hard
physical activity yeah are the two
related like when I play hockey right
ice hockey's very demanding I play with
people half my age so the the art of
keeping up with them leaves me
no time to think or worry about anything
else seeing it achieved a different way
absolutely right because what did you
say you can't do when you're poor work
can't think or worry
so we once we disabled thinking and
worrying it all so it's all the same
place okay
just two paths to the same door or yes
it's about a state it's about eliciting
a state of consciousness got it right
whether you fall asleep whether you are
knocked out or whether you were
anesthetized yeah if you are unconscious
you are unconscious
so you can lead to consciousness like
states of consciousness in different
ways a lot of people on stream ask me
about you know psychedelics and things
like that so like meditation I'm not
saying that they're exactly the same but
a state of consciousness is a state of
consciousness so there are different
roads to getting there so intense
physical exercise is a form of
meditation because the goal of
meditation is to attain a particular
state where your mental function is
actually turned off but your
consciousness or awareness remains high
really this I need this so badly because
you know the notes I'd written before
this and I said up front it's like I I
found I'm more and more grasping for
things and I'm no longer grasping for
like economic stuff so much is
experiential but that the hunger for
more is it is a problem
you were saying that you had you had
asked you had made notes or wanted to
ask questions about grasping before we
met today yeah yeah I mentioned it right
when we started that's why I said the
FOMO was myself that's a place I kicked
butt but I've noticed it in I'm several
fear missing out was like the easiest
way to summarize it I did think about it
and let me just see what I actually
wrote in my notes was I realized that
wanting to feel loved our topic from
last time has generally made me grasping
for lots of pleasant things activities
travel time with friends food I'm
pleasure-seeking and that was I
summarized that to you as FOMO because
that was like the the fastest way yeah
so yeah so that you know I so first of
all Ethan I think you've done a great
job of kind of reflecting I think I
think it's good that you're at a place
where you're not quite sure what to ask
because that means we've moved past
where your mental patterns have already
figured everything out does that make
sense yeah yeah we want to move you
beyond what you already understand which
is a lot yeah and and you know this is
gonna become harder as you as you learn
more and then you're gonna explore more
and things like that but that's okay so
any I'm gonna just ask real quick any so
do you have any other questions or do
people on your stream have questions uh
let's see
no looking at their questions the the
only one which I know you've answered
before is what do you charge an hour
which I already know the answer to so I
can answer for them offline okay you've
said before right it's four and a
quarter right that's your normal like
Billy went up in 2020 so I increase my
rates every there you go I'm getting
yeah so and my only question is man you
can't leave me hanging I want to follow
up on this shun
Shinya meditation like I'm super so will
follow so but so here's the thing you
have to practice the rocket ah yeah I
got it will so interestingly practicing
like mindfulness meditation was only
medium interesting to me this one i mike
damn it there's a candle in the house
i'm so on this because i because i do i
directly see the connection to something
i want to work on
so the that's interesting you've been or
it almost sounds as if the concern that
you had at the beginning of the session
which is how do i meditate is no longer
a concern
we'll see how i do this week but it
feels much more meditation last week
felt a little bit like and in in the
past my life felt a little bit like oh
this is a good thing you should do like
eat broccoli do sit-ups it's a good
thing but why exactly am i eating
broccoli why exactly am i doing situps
you know like ohm or health
this seems much more like you said I get
to pull the plug out of the anxiety to
do everything and out of the fear of
death out of the wall that's motivating
because it's a specific goal good that's
that's our goal right so now we'll go
back so you can talk as much as you want
to about behaviorally fine and get
behaviorally how to do it but I think
this is how meditation happens it's
about Karma it's about time in place and
inspiration and what you kind of saying
earlier that you know part of the the
Christian ideal that you try to live up
to is that of whom much is given much is
expected
yes and similarly God will provide that
which you need when you need it so don't
worry about it those words are
don't worry about it is it's very hard
for me yeah I'm an excellent worrier
yeah
world class yeah so you need a little
bit more faith right absolutely
okay so all right um thanks a lot man
yeah that was thank you
like I am I am deeply grateful actually
for today's last week I was intrigued
and and and like interested this week
I'm like honestly I wanted to tell you
I'm blown away right the the rate of
your ability to get inside quickly and
pull out something deep impressive and
valuable so thank you well it helps what
you have a willing participant and are
intelligent and dedicated and thoughtful
so then yeah a lot of people followed up
with me through the week and we're like
holy [ __ ] I could have never done that
in public
you'd be surprised for all of those
people you'd be surprised that I've been
surprised by how many people are willing
to come on and talk and and how well
this is working I think that's a big
problem is that we we we hide the worst
parts of ourself and thereby we prevent
them from being like helped or fixed
result in sunlight is an amazing
disinfectant yeah and that's that's what
I told him as they said well for the
benefit you know sure I said earlier I
felt embarrassed about stuff well
that's okay right if it if it helps me
get better because you you had I don't
know if you realize this but you had a
really good terrifying line which was
this is only gonna get worse for you
your your 50 as each year ticks off if
you're desperate to feed the beast I'm
you're afraid of death it's only going
to amplify and that was so obviously
true because what you don't know is that
I've had conversations with my wife
about like well I need to do this this
and this activity over the next five
years because I like I like to play
hockey I mentioned that but it's not
something you do in your 70s and so I
have like a mental clock of only so many
hockey games left and yeah you hit right
on it like if you have that thinking as
it it creates a desperation cycle that's
self reinforcing so yeah alright my work
man all right thank you thank you very
much
all right until next us yeah take care
and